---
id: c6768fbd-5a35-4b09-b0f5-099f6f766bad
title: 107,474 meters
date: 2019-02-13
tags: programming
image: 2019-02-13-107474-meters.png
---

Ten years ago, I went the first time hiking. I was 18 at that time, still
young, but contrary to my age, not really full of energy. I intensely followed
my passion in life — coding — which fulfilled my desire to create, and gave me
a strong sense of purpose. Back then, if you would ask me who am I, my immediate
answer would be a programmer. I woke up thinking about coding, spent my days
learning about coding, and would go to sleep only when my eyes gave up looking
at the screen. One day, I learned that I can install a blue light filter that
would give me a bit more time every day, and reduce the strain on my eyes. What
a joyful day that was, I was able to spend thirty minutes more, experimenting,
tweaking, creating.

But back to the topic. Ten years ago in some act of madness, I decided to listen
to my friend's call to adventure and signed up to a hiking trip of 25km. Now, I
fully understand that 25km doesn't sound much, but believe me, it was more than
enough for me back then. This happened in the last weekend of April, when the
weather is not too hot, not to cold, but just right. I packed my backpack with
five sandwiches, four liters of waters, spare socks, a towel and two extra
shirts, just in case something unexpected happened. Overall, I'm pretty
confident that my backpack was around seven kilos. The first two-three hours
went by pretty quick. We were talking, laughing, taking photographs of every
little detail in the woods. But then it struck me. The pain in my shoulders
from the 7kg backpack, the blisters on my legs from not-the-best shoes, and the
overall feeling that the world is going to end because I am out of breath. The
sun was high, and the sunshine blinded us through the woods. It was painful,
but somehow, I really enjoyed it. This was the first moment when I felt of deep
sense of meaning, and it wasn't connected to writing code. It took us about six
hours to finish the race.

Fast forward several years, I switched cities, started my college life. While I
ended up really enjoying hiking the last time, it wasn't enough to make me fall
in love with it. But this time, the call to action came came from a girl I
particularly liked back then. It's funny how women can act on man. They turn
your life around, and you start doing things you never previously even dreamt
about. I wish I would fall in love over and over again. Only the sky would be
the limit for me.
