---
id: aaf0ad4b-afd6-42a1-a290-70e1a399b962
title: What I learned from completing my first half-marathon
date: 2021-06-29
tags: life-work
image: 2021-06-29-running-my-first-half-marathon.png
---

Three days have passed since I completed my first half-marathon here in Novi
Sad. My legs are still sore, I still have several calluses on my feet, and my
butt muscles are still screaming when I stand up. It's the perfect time to
reflect and learn from this experience.

![Running my first half-marathon](images/2021-06-29-running-my-first-half-marathon.png)

I started jogging regularly [back in 2017](/running.html). It is my way of
zoning out, breathing deeply, and disconnecting from the day-to-day stress of
the modern workplace. In a word, meditating. But then corona hit us last year
and halted everything. No more running, no more healthy eating, no more friends,
only anxiety and soft panic attacks when someone gets closer than 6 feet to you.

After around two years of no actual physical activity, I got pulled into running
a half marathon by a friend. I started from zero three weeks ago, and when I say
zero, I mean that I was barely able to complete 5 kilometers on the first try.
It was a bit better on the second try, but still, it was almost impossible for
me to cross the 10k mark. The marathon day was getting closer, and I still
struggled with the basics.

![Running pace on first half marathon](images/2021-06-29-running-my-first-half-marathon-pace.png)

As you might expect, the marathon experience was brutal. I started strong. 6km
in my breath become erratic. On the 10km mark, I developed a callus on my right
foot. At 16km, I was running on sheer willpower, counting down every 100m till
the end. Finally, around 2hour 55min, I reached the finish line. My feet were on
fire.

But I finished it. I fucking did it!  What did I learn from this?

## I (you) can do much more than I (you) think

There are always reasons why I feel unprepared to take on a challenge.  For
example, "I never wrote a test. TDD is impossible.", or "This API can't be
faster. It is impossible.", or in my latest case, "I'm too fat to run a
marathon.".

I (you) are mostly much more capable than you give yourself credit. The right
approach is to Just Do It â„¢. I guarantee that you will be at least 40% more
capable than you think.

## Environment â‰¥ Willpower

An important observation to make here is that I was able to complete the
marathon. I simply didn't do it. So what was the difference this time? First, a
friend nudged me into it. The second is that the marathon was an organized event
with a well-defined deadline. Third, my life partner supported me in every way.

Individual willpower, or discipline, fades quickly. However, with the right
people and the right environment, everything feels natural and straightforward.
They are there to kick you in the ass when you feel stuck, and they are there to
heal and support you when you get burned.

For example, take the example of a 10x engineer. An engineer from a different
company can feel 10x compared to you. But I can bet that he is not 10x compared
to his peers, not even close. It is the culture that makes her 10x. Culture
always predates individuals.

## Will I do it again?

You bet I will. I'm already looking forward to the next one in September.

107km here I come! ðŸ‘Ÿ
