---
id: 7d6c18c6-6d1b-4f46-8ce8-2d2200e14952
title: Manage Your Time or Someone Else Will Do It for You
date: 2024-08-25
tags: programming
image: 2024-08-25-manage-your-time-or-someone-else-will-do-it-for-you.png
---

From the moment we’re born, our time isn’t really our own. Parents, schools,
and later, employers all have a say in how our days unfold. As kids, we’re on
someone else’s schedule. Education systems beat it into us, training us to
march to the drum of a clock that someone else controls. By the time we enter
the workforce, we’re well-prepared to hand over the reins of our time to
another authority.

Most people never break free from this pattern. They move from the structure of
school into the rigid framework of corporate life, where time is often wasted
on pointless tasks. Think about the endless meetings you’ve sat
through—meetings that could have been an email, a quick chat, or even avoided
entirely. It’s astonishing how much time we collectively waste on rituals that
serve no real purpose.

The office itself is a masterclass in time-wasting. Long commutes eat away at
your day. Two hours stuck in traffic might not seem like much, but add that up
over a week, a month, a year. Suddenly, you’ve lost hundreds of hours that
could have been spent on something meaningful. That’s time you could’ve used to
learn a new skill, start a side project, or just have some damn fun. Adventures
don’t just happen—they’re made, and you need time to make them.

Complete work-life separation isn’t optimal either. When you rigidly divide
work from the rest of your life, you end up competing for time and space with
everyone else. The classic example is the gym at 5 p.m. It’s packed, loud, and
stressful. Go at noon, though, and it’s a different world. You have space, you
have time, and you have freedom. Why not work when you’re most productive, and
live when it’s most enjoyable?

If you measure your team’s output by the hours they spend in a chair, you’re
doing it wrong. It’s naive and lazy management. Forcing people to be present
for a fixed number of hours is a waste, plain and simple. It’s not about the
time spent; it’s about what gets done. When you value chair time over actual
work, you’re collectively making everyone’s life worse. You’re stealing time
from them—their most valuable asset.

The truth is, if you don’t take control of your time, someone else will. And
they’ll do it in a way that benefits them, not you. Don’t let that happen. Take
the reins, cut out the waste, and reclaim your time. It’s the only way to live
a life that’s truly yours.

&mdash; Igor
